---
id: 463
title: My album of 2009
date: 2010-01-08T19:48:00+00:00
author: Admin
layout: post
guid: http://kwur.com/?p=463
permalink: /my-album-of-2009/
blogger_blog:
  - blog.kwur.com
blogger_author:
  - DBhttp://www.blogger.com/profile/13920147272800792372noreply@blogger.com
blogger_permalink:
  - /2010/01/my-album-of-2009.html
categories:
  - Uncategorized
---
<div class="pf-content">
  <p>
    My Album of 2009, by Daniel Burton (age 21).
  </p>
  
  <div>
  </div>
  
  <div>
    The one album that has been pretty-much ignored by these best-of posts has been Merriweather Post Pavilion, other than Dylan&#8217;s weird little comment. Yes, I have heard their other albums. But this one is entirely different. I have written this entry several times over in my head while driving around my hometown with this album playing very loud, but now it&#8217;s all mushed together (fitting, considering the very Wet sound of MPP)&#8230; so here it goes.
  </div>
  
  <div>
  </div>
  
  <div>
    I was going to say, this album is Accessible. But as much as that has been said, I don&#8217;t know that it&#8217;s true. If I played this album for my mom, she would not understand what was going on. Electronic beats? Weird bleated yells? It is kind of overwhelming. Maybe, say, a frat-bro would understand it a little more&#8230; oh yeah, there are some beats there, but then some f***** is yelling over it. Whatever, shit&#8217;s gay.
  </div>
  
  <div>
  </div>
  
  <div>
    The thing that I think grabs people about this album is that it <i>feels </i>universal. What does that mean? It&#8217;s the feeling I get when I hear, forgive me, the Replacements. I think, &#8220;why isn&#8217;t this on the radio? why doesn&#8217;t every person in America know this band?&#8221; I don&#8217;t understand on any level how a song like &#8220;Unsatisfied&#8221; isn&#8217;t part of the set of American Classic Rock Standards that every 8th-grade-boy knows. MPP is obviously a little more out there, but it&#8217;s so perfectly BEAUTIFUL. There&#8217;s so much of what people love about, say, the Beatles or the Beach Boys in there. There was a point when Americans accepted a little more experimentation (or, a tame, pop version of Experimentation) in their music.
  </div>
  
  <div>
  </div>
  
  <div>
    A lot of people have talked about how &#8220;mature&#8221; this album is. I hate this. I hate when people refer to a sound as &#8220;maturing,&#8221; because this almost always means, in my experience, &#8220;more boring.&#8221; I hate the hierarchy calling a new album &#8220;mature&#8221; creates between the new sound and the old sound. In the case of an album like <i>I and Love and You </i>by the Avett Brothers, which broke my fucking heart this year, or the later Replacements albums, it was definitely the case that something really was lost when they &#8220;matured.&#8221; What is going on on MPP, though, is a move away from a certain impulse that older AC albums have had&#8230; an impulse that maybe has to do with being a little younger. So maybe the word is &#8220;matured,&#8221; but I still hate it for the implication of &#8220;getting better.&#8221;
  </div>
  
  <div>
  </div>
  
  <div>
    Anyway, the urge I mean to describe is the urge that makes you like, say, hardcore punk. At least in my case, when I listen to &#8220;Pay to Cum,&#8221; or James Chance, or &#8220;European Son,&#8221; I don&#8217;t really think &#8220;oh, my Dad would love this.&#8221; And I don&#8217;t fucking WANT him to like it! That isn&#8217;t the point. In the case of MPP, this impulse, which was present in the willfully weird earlier AC albums, just isn&#8217;t there anymore. This is beyond &#8220;I&#8217;m so fucking weird, deal with it, it&#8217;s who I am&#8221; and moved into &#8220;I&#8217;m weird, sure, but look at how awesome it is to be weird. everyone is a little weird. and weird people are people, who have kids and houses and walk around in the rain and stuff.&#8221; This is the moment when you realize, hey, that weirdo kid who wears an Indian head-dress to school is a really nice guy, and he writes pretty songs, and maybe we should be friends. Maybe as much as I want my mom to love him he&#8217;s just a little too weird for her, but he&#8217;s great. And this is what a lot of the transition from punk to &#8220;indie&#8221; is about&#8230; it&#8217;s what grabbed me when I first heard bands like the Replacements and early REM and the Violent Femmes. Why doesn&#8217;t everyone love this? Why hasn&#8217;t everyone heard this?
  </div>
  
  <div>
  </div>
  
  <div>
    Furthermore, I enjoy this album more than any of their other albums. The first 6 songs are so perfect that I can&#8217;t stop listening to them. Right at the point where I thought I was &#8220;over the buzz&#8221; a few months ago, and started thinking things like &#8220;maybe only My Girls and Brothersport are any good,&#8221; I listened to the album again and was blown away. Wait, this is the album with Summertime Clothes!? This is the album with &#8220;Also Frightened?&#8221; (why don&#8217;t more people talk about these two songs?) &#8220;No More Runnin?&#8221; Every time I hear these songs, I smile and turn it up. Some of the later songs are not my favorites, but it is very possible that this is because I can&#8217;t stop listening to the first 6.
  </div>
  
  <div>
  </div>
  
  <div>
    On another level, this album was huge. I remember the first time I listened to it, and ran into my friends&#8217; apartment (KWUR DJ&#8217;s Invisible Cola and Jackson Jive) to make them listen to it with me. I remember hearing &#8220;My Girls&#8221; in someone&#8217;s DJ set at a party and feeling like everyone on earth was listening to this album. Were they? Obviously not. But that feeling, of this being &#8220;The Album&#8221; with a capital The (as in &#8220;Winnie The Pooh,&#8221; as my latin teacher used to say) made a big impact on me&#8230; I don&#8217;t know that I&#8217;ve ever had that feeling before. It&#8217;s a feeling that I think used to happen more often in college radio&#8230; books like <i>Our Band Could Be Your Life </i>have interviews where people talk about remembering where they were the first time they heard certain albums, or walking down the halls of their dorm and hearing people blasting &#8220;You&#8217;re Living All Over Me.&#8221;
  </div>
  
  <div>
  </div>
  
  <div>
    But seriously, it&#8217;s really really good. Come on.
  </div>
</div>